---
title: April Updates
slug: april-updates-2
date_published: 2019-04-08T02:31:38.000Z
date_updated:   2019-04-08T02:31:38.000Z
tags: fa-calendar
layout: post
---

<p>Howdy, friends!  I'm writing this belated update having just arrived back in Seattle from a week of leisure and wine in Paris.  Apologies for the sluggishness in responding to emails and DMs; rest assured, I'll be spending the next few days getting back to folks.</p><h2 id="what-s-new">What’s new</h2><p>March was a <em>big</em> month for Buttondown.</p><p>I shipped three things that have folks have been pining for for <em>months</em>:</p><ol><li>You can now create and send emails through <a href="https://api.buttondown.email">Buttondown’s API</a>.</li><li>Buttondown now has a <a href="https://zapier.com/platform/public-invite/10328/3f461ccf51be6e2e3f356c7365434907/">Zapier integration</a>, meaning that you can now do things like fire webhook events in response to new subscribers or send out emails in response to RSS items.</li><li>Paid subscriptions are now in public beta.  (I’ve onboarded three folks and am in the process of onboarding three more; if you want in, just email me!)</li></ol><p>I cannot be more excited about all of these new ships.  There’s a lot of work to be done still (especially on that last piece: paid subscriptions are <em>barebone</em>, and I need to flesh out analytics and reporting) but this represents the culmination of a lot of work and I am thrilled to have it across the line.</p><h2 id="what-s-next">What’s next</h2><p>April is going to be a languid month, filled with paying down some technical debt, solving myriad bugs, and getting my ducks in a row. I’m not promising anything too huge, but some small stuff you may enjoy:</p><ol><li>More work on enabling multiple newsletters for a given account.</li><li>Supporting Firefox/Safari’s <em>reading mode</em> on archive pages.</li><li>Nicer slug URLs for archived emails.</li><li>Exposing subscriber events through the API.</li><li>Seriously, lots of bug fixes.</li></ol><h2 id="running-costs">Running costs</h2><p>I've updated <a href="https://buttondown.email/running-costs">Buttondown's running costs</a> for April.  Notable are the increased Clearbit costs and the ever-rising costs of Mailgun's email validation; if I have time, I'm going to work on ameliorating both.</p><h2 id="some-other-things-you-might-find-interesting-">Some other things you might find interesting.</h2><p>I’ve been writing about Buttondown a fair bit on my personal blog:</p><ol><li><a href="https://jmduke.com/2019/04/07/buttondown-s-anti-roadmap">Buttondown's anti-roadmap</a></li><li><a href="https://jmduke.com/2019/03/25/solvable-problems-in-a-mid-stage-side-project">Buttondown's solveable problems</a>.</li></ol>
